There are many responsibilities of maintaining open source projects that are non
technical. A project leader should feel comfortable building the community,
promoting the library, maintaining good communication with many people, when to
release new versions and why, etc. If you want to learn the soft skills needed
to grow and maintain an open source project, then this book is for you.

Many software companies (oh hello, thoughtbot!) successfully apply open source
practices in their day-to-day work, creating very efficient collaboration in a
team and across teams to make a project succeed. If you want to learn how open
source contributors are organized and the ways they develop software to apply in
your own company, this book is for you.

As Software Developers we are used to thinking about software projects, but
there are also different kinds of collaborative projects such as
[libraries](https://github.com/GITenberg), [government
data](https://github.com/project-open-data), [geographical
data](https://openmundi.github.io/),
[media](http://search.creativecommons.org/), etc., for which many of the
guidelines described here are also applicable.

The history of Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) projects is fascinating, and
can teach you the reasons why the community was shaped the way it is today. We
will not talk about this here as it’s not directly relevant to how to lead your
projects, but if you are interested I encourage you to read the [Wikipedia
article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_free_and_open-source_software)
for it, which contains a good introduction and tons of linked resources. A
book you might enjoy that speaks about the transition from centralized to
decentralized software development teams is “The Cathedral and the Bazaar”, from
open source author and advocate Eric Raymond.

This is what we have learned about creating, maintaining and growing our open
source projects.
